Hello, everyone. Welcome to a new episode of the
Center. I'm your host, as always, Ricardo Lopez, and
today I'm joined by Doctor Patricia Silva. She is
an assistant professor at the University of Aveo and
a researcher at the Governance Competitiveness and Public Policies
Research Center of the University of Avio. And today
we're going to talk about the book she's the
editor of together with Pedro Magalas and Nunu Montero,
that is Portugal in the 21st century. So, Doctor
Patrici, welcome to the show. It's a huge pleasure
to everyone.
Thank you for having me here today.
So, I, I mean, this is a, a very
interesting book. I, I mean, in my particular case,
it's even more interesting because I'm also Portuguese as
you are. So, but what are the goals of
this book? Why write a book about Portugal in
the 21st century?
Well, uh, so, so the idea for this um
edited book came from a series of conversations that
Nuno Montero had with the Luo American Development Foundation.
Uh, AT the moment, no, Nuno, Nuno, he was
working at a university in the in the US
and he thought that we needed a reference book
that would allow academics to deal with Portugal and
what what the changes that happened during the 21st
century in the Portuguese case, but he also wanted
to have a book that would be interesting for
the um for the entire public, for the ones
that are interested in knowing a little bit more
about Portugal. So the book was targeted at these
two audiences, I, I'd say one academic and the
one that would, would be allowing, would allow the
general public to be involved in these discussions about
the Portuguese case. Nunu began developing this project with
uh the authors, the specific authors of each of
the chapters that we will discuss during this interview.
Unfortunately, Nuno passed away before he he managed to
complete this job and so the flood asked me
and Pedro Mlange to um continue uh the project.
So the idea is basically the idea of dealing
with a country that has a very interesting story.
And especially the fact that it had 4 decades
of a dictatorship and that had enduring effects. Um,
WHILE we noticed that there was a major transformation
and we can see that obviously in in the
first years after the transition to democracy. But then
we also find that um the, well, the specificities
of the transition process and also the, the fact
that we have enduring aspects that allow us to
now understand a little bit of what is happening
in terms of our identity, in terms of our
culture. In terms of how we relate to the
European Union and how relevant the European Union is
also in terms of the party system, so we
have a lot of specific cities from these decades
of dictatorship that were, were somehow translated into different
arenas. And Nuno had this interest in dealing with
this, uh, how, what he thought would be a
remarkable country with a remarkable history. So, uh, well,
we, what the, the, the, what we asked the
authors of every, um, chapter was to think about
their specific arena, either the economy or uh or
the political system, the arts, literature, we asked them
to think about how the, we had a spectacular
uh economic development, how the country has transformed itself
from a social perspective, and we wanted to, uh,
specially look into how, how these transformations play out
today currently during this, um, this new millennium specialist,
specially, sorry. Mhm.
So, before we talk about Portugal in the 21st
century, I think it would be important to cover
some historic, uh, ground here because, uh, this year
marks the 51st anniversary of the fall of the,
of the military dictatorship here in Portugal. And, uh,
I mean, there was a democratization process after that.
Um, WHAT, what do you think were some of
the main changes that occurred with the transition from
a dictatorship to a social democracy?
Well, I think this, this is such a broad
question because it, it, there are, there are hundreds
of um articles that have been published trying to
deal with these main changes. Uh, AND, uh, well,
you know, that the journey began with this, uh,
carnation revolution that some authors even say that, uh,
it marked the beginning of the third wave of
democratization in the world. So, let me, I want
to, to stress that because Portugal did this process
of transition to a democracy without having A, um,
without having a model that would, that the country
could aim for, so that necessarily generated a little
bit of, of conflict and a little bit of
indecisiveness as to where we should go after this
peaceful military coup. But we did have this peaceful
military coup that, you know, that was led by
the armed forces movement and it, it marked the
end of one of the biggest dictatorship. That occurred
at the moment with more than 48, with more
than 48 years. And with a large period where
we, we have strict censorship, political repression, no political
freedoms. So uh this revolution was also largely fueled
by these discontent of citizens, particularly because of the
ongoing colonial wars that was draining. The resources and
also the morale in Portugal. So there was this,
um, this, the public desire and also this desire
among the members of the armed forces that wanted
to uh overthrow the dictatorship and build a new
democratic um society. So yes, we did experience a,
a, a very significant transformation. With, with first elections
where, where we have citizens participating in a competitive
scenario, that's because we did have elections during the
democrat during the dictatorship, but those are not necessarily
competitive and that's, that's a huge difference. Um, SO
we had, um, we also had the process of
preparing the very complex process of preparing this new
constitution with civil rights, political freedom. Uh WITH social
rights that were uh essential for uh the democracy.
And then we have this very, very rapid decolonization
of the Portuguese territories in Africa, uh, and that's,
uh, that, that how fast it was was also
um um uh an aspect of contention within the
armed forces that eventually generated this convulsionary period right
after 74. And then The regime, uh political parties
that were formed at the moment, especially, you know,
the Socialist Social Democratic Party and the Socialist Party
that was not, that was formerly uh a little
before uh 74, but the, the, and was formed
not, not necessarily in the country but in while
in exile, but, but they were, they were trying
to find this, the, the space for these political
parties. And one of the ways that they understood
that the new democratic regime would be uh would
be able to gain grounds was through the expansion
of rights and welfare. That's why we have this
major conquest in Portugal, which is the national health
system. The idea that we needed to improve education,
health care, social services, reducing inequalities, and, you know,
improve the quality of life of citizens. And that
was, uh, and that is, that's certainly an arena
where we made, we made huge progresses during the
first decades of uh the democracy. Obviously we had
political instability, uh, we, we, we did have uh
uh a lot of, of political instability, especially because
there was contention as to which type of regime
we would have. Uh, AND because we had the
communists wishing a different, uh, type of democracy and
then we had the Socialist Party and the Social
democratic Party that wanted a more pro-Western, uh, type
of, uh, of democracy, a liberal democracy. And so
we have also this, uh, these two political parties,
these two, I would say these two poles that
were aiming for different, um, goals. So major transformations
but with um with uh a very convulsionary journey.
Mhm. When it comes to the democratization process, I
mean, of course, it was a process because the
transition from a dictatorship to a democracy doesn't occur
overnight. How long was it just for people to
have an idea of how these things play out?
Well, the, the, the, it is not easy to
um to establish a specific date, but I would
say that the first two years were fundamental to
um decide that we wanted to have what type
of a democracy we wanted. It was also the
first few years that we, we decided that, well,
the, the goal would be to democratize democratize the
country, also deal with the colonies and decolonize, um,
but it wasn't definitely a a smooth and negotiated.
Uh, PROCESS like the one, that we saw for
example in Spain where, um, where the political elites
actually negotiated there, there were agreements between the old
regime and the opposition. So what we had in
Portugal was this radical break, uh, and that was
also what generated this intense period with uh political
and social uh uh contention, I'd say. So, but,
but, but I would say that we had these
two first years where, you know, we had the
hot summer of '74 when we had these tensions
that even generated violent clashes and um and then
also November 25 and 75, so we did have
this uh This um period, I would say of
about 2 years from the carnation to the time
where we actually were able to adopt a new
constitution and then managed to have elections uh in,
in that, that would definitely establish this as a
country that was democratizing, democratizing. Obviously, we say that
we have uh there's this transition period and then
there's the period where we say that, well, we
now have a consolidated democracy and that these are
two different processes, two different periods, and what we
can see there is that we can, we, it
is generally assumed that we can see that Portugal
as a consolidated democracy from the moment when Cavaco
Silva managed his Uh, first majority as the government
and then we had stable patterns of party interaction,
stable patterns of government formation, and that allows us
also to think that, well, we are now entering
the stage where we have um we have, we,
we are now entering the stage where we have
Uh, fully democracy. It's not, so I just wanted
to make sure that we make these two periods
as distinct, one thinks is the transition to and
the other is to consolidate it as a democracy.
Half a century later, do you see that there's
been a legacy to the dictatorship in any way?
And if so, in what ways does it manifest?
Is it politically? Is it in terms of the
population's mentality, particularly the older people who live through
the dictatorship? Uh, WHAT do you think about it?
Well, there are so many, uh, there are so
so many of these legacies that we can see.
One of them is obviously politically. First one is
the, the idea of what kind of parties do
we have now, and that that is a lot
explained by the the process of the transition because,
you know, the political parties actually emerged at the
period where they were, they didn't have necessarily time
to mobilize the electorate. And especially the social socialist
party and the Social Democratic Party when they emerged,
they had a view of what kind of a
democracy they wanted. And then we had a communist
that had a stronger mobilization, I would say. But
this new political parties that that were formed, they
actually entered government a few days after they were
formally uh established. So what this generated political parties
that are what we call internally mobilized, it means
that they were able to establish their organizations taking
stock of the resources that they gained from state,
so. We managed to have these political parties that
somehow are dependent on the state, how the, the,
and that has to some extent discouraged the development
of strong independent party party structures. Another thing that
we noticed is how is clientelism, the idea that
the, that, that is quite There is, there are
a lot of research that claims that this is
quite pervasive in the Portuguese case because parties actually
were able to use public administration to distribute positions
to their followers. It was an easy way of,
you know, guaranteeing support for the political parties. So
what they did, they took stock of those resources
that they had access to. And to some extent
that generated a path where clientelism has has has
been pervasive, and it becomes increasingly more difficult for
political parties to get rid of this. So while
political parties are central, they do have this, uh,
this, um this dependency on the state. And then
we also noticed that in, in terms of the
economy, I mean, uh, Susanna Peralta also to some
extent deals with that, the, the idea that we
had, well, this massive nationalization of industries. We had
one of the biggest public sector businesses at, at
the uh public business sector at the moment. Uh,
AND we, that, that to some extent also generated
a little bit of, you know, uh, burden, an
enormous burden in terms of, of the public sector
and, and also, um, the, the difficulties in dealing
with this enormous uh structures. We, uh we also
deal with the, this nationalized economy that was characterized
by poor productivity, deficits with political interference as well
and to some extent these are, there are some
inefficiencies here that endured. Um, AND obviously there are,
um, there were at the moment is, uh, also
connecting to the size of the public, uh, civil
service, the public civil service because because of the,
the purges because Portugal did had extensive purges of
political and administrative personnel, uh, from the, from the
new state because of this. Transition through Rutura because
we, we, we didn't have a pact as I
mentioned before, uh, so what we had was uh
a public administration that was destructured, so we didn't
have necessarily experienced uh staff. It created a lot
of inefficiencies in governance. And uh that also uh
generated this, um this, this difficult uh relationship also
with uh public administration. And finally, I think one
of the most relevant and we keep talking about
this is that there was an intense dispute between
the Socialist Party and the Communist Party during the
transition period. And because it, it, it basically deals
with all the two different parties and these two
political pluralism and the different, the, the different types
of democracy that these two parties wanted. So that
generated a divide between in at the left, so
we, while we would, why would it, would, we
would expect this divide to occur between the left
and the right, what we had in the Portuguese
case was this divide between political parties and the
left. And that wall that was built between the
Socialist Party and the Communist Party was actually endured
and it generally led to the exclusion of the
Communist Party from every government formation until now, until
obviously 2015, as you know, when there was this
collaboration between left-wing parties, there was uh somehow um
innovative because we wouldn't expect that given this historical
Uh, background. But I would say that also this,
uh, this is probably one of the major, probably
one of the major, um, aspects of these legacies
of the dictatorship.
So one more major event in our history that
I would like to ask you about before we
get actually into the 21st century. Uh, LET'S talk
a little bit about Portugal's accession to the European
Union in the 1980s. What does it represent historically
and what would you say are the main impacts
it had in terms of, uh, at the level
of politics, economics, and also at a social level?
Well, this is again a question that would generate
hours of conversation because we, well, because we as,
as we have this transition period and as things
were going, we have reasons to believe that the
country would make its way through a democracy. But
having the European Union as a supporter of a
democracy was definitely relevant to establish and to consolidate
Portugal as a democracy because it was at the
moment we had uh two ways, two visions for
Portugal, Portugal. We either would look for African colonies
or we would align with Western democracies and try
to modernize the country looking at the European Union.
And it became, it became very clear in the
70s, in mid 70s when Maurice Swars decided that
he would join the then uh European Economic Community
and then became, became the European Union and what
he thought that this was a way to secure
democracy, to enjoy the opportunity of the funds, especially
to modernize the economy that was so relevant. To
provide citizens with the gains of being a democracy
and with the gains of having, being part of
this new world of, of the European Union. So
when he, uh he applied for a membership for
EU membership in '77, it became definitely a priority
for every government. We do not find major differences
between our main political parties, the Socialist Party or
the Social Democratic Party. They were basically aligned with
this idea that we needed the European Union to
uh to modernize the country. And the European Union
also had high standards in terms of what they
expected of a democracy. This was also, it was
also the European Union that were um that created
to some extent the idea that we could not
have the armed forces with such a relevant role
of the armed forces within our government. And also
this, um, this, the, the, uh the, the pressure
towards modernizing also the economy. Uh, IN terms of,
uh, you know, the, the story because the country
gained a lot from being part of this club
of the European club because of the funds, which
helped modernize the structures which were strongly used to
reduce inequalities at the regional level. That was used
to improve education and healthcare. It also politically it
helped solidify the consensus among political parties and also
among citizens about the importance of European integration. I
mean, we even now we see these Eurobarometers that
largely expressed this idea that citizens still think that
being part of the European Union is a good
thing. They have a good image of the European
Union. And that, um, that, uh, that definitely is
relevant. But now, obviously one of the things that
we come across is this idea that obviously Portugal
in the 21st century deals with um this this
additional difficulty at this moment because we, we, we
are now extending, we have been making this progress
of extending, enlarging the European Union and if Portugal
was had this Um, privileged position, even when we
can see that there as a member that receives
a lot of EU funds, but there was a
shift because obviously as we are enlarging uh some
of the recipients are other countries, not necessarily Portugal.
And so this shift in terms of the allocation
of funds and also this um perception that Portugal
is at the periphery of the European Union that
might have generated a little of disillusionment within within
Portugal about the gains of the European Union. But
I think that overall, it was definitely a strategic
decision that was able to consolidate the democracy and
help, help you go through navigate this uh political,
economic, and social um matters that were relevant to
secure democracy.
So since we've been part of the European Union
for more than 30 years now, almost 40, how
has Portugal fared in comparison to other members of
the European Union for the first two decades of
the 21st century?
Well, I think that one of the things that
mostly that has to be highlighted here is that
Portugal has during the 21st century has had one
of the most turbulent chapters in our recent history,
which is the financial crisis and how Portugal dealt
with this financial crisis. Obviously, Portugal had structural weaknesses
in terms of the economy, in terms of public
debt, and we, we did uh require this financial
bailout, the troika package that came with, was, was
fundamental for uh Portuguese uh restructuring, rethinking about kind
of state we wanted. Um, BUT it came with
very strict, um, conditions, I would say. But what,
what was relevant at this time was that Portugal
was actually able to implement a lot of these
measures, cuts in the public services. And to some
extent, some of them were not necessarily with, with,
although the crisis, this financial crisis has gone a
couple of years ago, was gone a couple of
years ago, fact is that we may not have
been able to go to reach a standard where
we wanted to be in terms of public services.
Uh, WE, we also had this, um. This, this
huge program that was uh well, difficult to um
um to implement. But in the end, it what
was, what was interesting in the Portuguese case is
this idea that we, Portugal was able to regain
credibility. It was actually considered one, a, a good
student within the European Union. And we saw that
when we saw, for example, Mario Centeno being considered
to be um to become the president of the
Eurogroup. It, it was to some extent also understood
as a testament of how the country would have
um a good reputation in Europe and also how
the country would be considered as a model for
other countries that were struggling, I'd say. So, well,
well, Portugal has made it through, I think that
uh it has made huge progress, but obviously we
will talk about it, I guess later because the
high levels of public debt, debt are debt are
still there, uh, uh, and many of the cuts
that were made. Uh, WHERE in terms of public
investment, we, we, we have left essential services like
healthcare and education underfunded, uh, and that, uh, to
some extent also, um, also portrays this image as
Portugal being, um, while efficient, it may not be
sufficiently efficient in terms of the allocation of resources.
You mentioned briefly there the 2008 economic crisis. How
would you characterize our response to it? And we
are now in 2025. Do you think we are
still being affected by it in some way?
Well, my, my question would be, yes, we are
still affected by the crisis in several ways. I
mean, while obviously we uh one of the things
is definitely in terms of public discourse, we did
not have governments uh so focused on the idea
that we need to reduce the budget deficits and
stabilize the economy. This became as um Uh, a
lasting scar of this 2008, uh, crisis, 2015,014, I
guess. So we, we, we had this, well, we
thought that we only had some political parties that
we're dealing with and we're considering this as um
a priority. We now have the two main parties
considering it, it both are considering it as a
priority. And the, the results are out there, so
we saw the Socialist Party made, made a huge
progress in, in, in this regard, but all the
other parties that are coming are still dealing with
this need to keep our, our um budget deficit
stable. And obviously reduce this deficit. But what the,
the, where I think that we have the major
impact is, is, is most definitely in terms of
the public services and uh one of the chapters
of this book clearly demonstrates that that uh well
we have particularly in the healthcare and education, they
were really strongly strained during the crisis and um
the, this, this, there are ongoing issues there. Uh,
IN terms of personnel, in terms of resources that
are allocated, in terms, and these are services that
are fundamental to reduce inequalities in the Portuguese case
that are still out there, and that feed populism.
So these inequalities to some extent feed populism and
the, the way to Lower them is through education
and healthcare access to these public services and they
are under severe stress and that is definitely one
of the memories of the crisis that continues, uh,
and that, um, will that, that all of the
countries have to deal with.
In the book, you also take the time to
talk a little bit about the formation of a
Portuguese national identity. How did it occur? I mean,
how did it develop over time and which factors
contributed to it?
Well, that's one of the things that the Gol
Sobral does in this chapter. It deals with the,
this idea that Portugal, Portugal Portuguese identity was built
as a mixture, a mixture of territory of the
boundaries of the limits, geographical limits, but also a
little bit of culture, uh, and this, this idea
that we, uh, the culture and also Mostly linguistic
issues that we do not have. Uh, DIVERSITY in
terms of language and also there's obviously a little
bit of history in that, you know, that, that
Josemanov Sobral goes through this idea that we have
this, uh, this this uh Fonsiri is that managed
to put Portugal on the map. Uh, AND the
how it declared to be a prince of Portugal
and this, uh, and the recognition of, uh, Portugal
through the Treaty of Samoa. So there's also a
little bit of history here that obviously Chia Noral
does it a lot more than I'm probably doing
here. Uh, AND, um, it does explain this, uh,
in, uh, in, in depth. But one of the
things that I found so much, so, so much
interesting in his chapter is how he also Deals
with how the identity was built because of the
the symbolic issue and one of the things that
he mentions in his chapter was what he calls
the miracle of Urik when he said that that
that miracle says that Christ actually appeared to Erikus
before a battle. Uh, AND, uh, that, uh, Christ
was actually blessing his mission. So to some extent,
this also tied Portugal to this identity, not only
in terms of language, in terms of the territory,
but also how close Portugal would be in terms
of Christianity and the idea that we are to
some extent, a chosen people. So we, by, by,
by the 14th century. We, we already have this
national consciousness that was uh trying to spread and
we, we have these three pillars in terms of
language, the territory, and also this idea of how
friends, there was some, some linkage to uh this
Christianity that also helped build um uh the nation
as we know it today.
And how would you characterize the welfare state in
Portugal? What are its main feature, features and how
does it compare to other European nations?
Well, that's uh Rui Branco and uh Pedro de
Silva. They wrote this chapter on one of the
major aspects that I think distinguishes the Portuguese case,
which is the welfare state and how relevant the
welfare state is uh for Portugal. And what they,
uh, they, I, I think that one of the
main takeouts of this art of their chapter is
that it is indeed an aspect that faces significant
challenges because of the dual, what they call this
market dualization, you know, that you have protection for
the ones that are working and are integrated in
the, in the labor market. And the ones that
are only temporary workers and you do have uh
these two types of support for citizens. So that's
a specific aspect of our welfare system that puts
some, uh, that's, that is also constraining. Then we
have uh these demographic pressures uh that uh are
ongoing in the Portuguese case and it's interesting that
they bring that. To their chapter because it is
one of the issues that are, that, you know,
political, politically, it has to be on, on the
agenda how the demography is putting pressure on the
welfare state. And we should deal with that as
well and obviously, as we mentioned before, the limited
expenditure, but I think that we have a welfare
system that is to some extent unique. It aims
to provide universal access to health care. Obviously funded
through our, uh, general taxation, but it has been
a vital institution. It was a vital institution during
the democratization process and it still is a vital
even if it is dealing with, um with this
uh difficulties, particularly related to uh the financial sustainability
of the social security. Um, uh, WELL, of this
welfare. And one of the things that they deal
with is this idea that we, the way that
we index pensions to life expectancy, also how um
how early retirement has been penalized. It, it, it
has reduced the generosity of our social security systems.
And also, obviously, during the, the, the financial crisis
that we have just dealt with, we also dealt
with um cuts, freezes, reduced uh investment in this
arena. So it, it, it, it, it not only
Generates this debate on the relevance of the welfare
state, but also the impact of the welfare state
in terms of how it, how pivotal it can
be to reduce inequalities. Obviously, now we are dealing
with this, what we currently have is a social
security system that has to deal with Poverty with
social exclusion. A lot has been done in terms
of, you know, what they deal with with in
the chapters and how Portugal insured this minimum income
that was a, a huge step to combat uh
poverty, but again, there, there are uh uh there
are uh a set of rules that citizens now
have to address if they want to have access
to these issues. And uh what, what the um
chapter concludes says is that while we do have
a welfare state that, you know, shares some similarities
with other countries like Spain, uh, like Spain or
Greece. Uh, WE are also aiming at having, uh,
uh, uh, social security services that we would be
able to compare with the Northern European countries like
Sweden and Denmark, these are the ones that we
keep comparing with, uh, because of, of the, uh,
idea that Portugal welfare state is a slightly, slightly
less comprehensive than, than the ones that we find
in these countries. Um, SO we do have a
significant level of social expenditure, that's what the, the
chapter concludes, but it's still below what we find
in these more extensive welfare systems.
I would like to ask you now just a
few questions about our political system. So what would
you say characterizes Portugal's political system when it comes
to uh the electoral system and to party representation?
Well, Carlos, Carlos Jalali, he's the one that dives
into Portuguese political system and what he conclude, what
the chapter that he wrote is actually about how
fascinating we have this mixture of structures in the
Portuguese case and he he he unpacks this idea
that we have a semi-presidential representative democracy, which means
that we, we have a president and the prime
minister. But the kicker here is that the, the
president is directly elected by the people. It's not
like, you know, for example, in Germany, where the
president comes from parliament. So there are, they are
both, both the president and the government are directly
elected by citizens as you know, in 2024 we
have legislative elections and then we will have presidential
elections. So these are two representative institutions that are
both elected by citizens. But a funny part here
is that when we have a president that has
veto powers. Uh, THE fact is that the, the
government is actually accountable to parliament, so it is
up to parliament mostly to ensure that uh government
uh stays in power. The, the electoral system, as
you asked, is, is also, it has been central
also. It's it's also one of those one of
those legacies that we came from the transition period
because the electoral system. As we have a closed
list proportional representation system. What does this mean? Well,
it just means that we do not select individual
candidates. I mean, citizens vote for political parties and
it is up to the party to decide um
the order of the can, uh, it's up to
the party to decide the order of the candidates.
So the seats are distributed. According to how citizens
actually vote, the percentage of votes that each party
gets using this old formula and the formula somehow
benefits the two main political parties, the Socialist Party
and the Social Democratic Party. There's also, we do
not have an electoral threshold. I mean, electoral thresholds
are the limits. Uh, FOR example, uh, Germany again
has these electoral thresholds where smaller parties, if they
do not reach a certain quota in terms of
uh voting, they do not get to be represented
in parliament. We do not have those formal, formally
in law, but however, because we have Electoral districts
that have the different populations and obvious, obviously this
translates into different what we call magnitudes, which means
that in some electoral districts, we only elect 2
members in parliament and in other districts we elect
46. So this generates a huge divide within the
country. It is easier for political parties to get
representation in this bigger. Um, THE magnitude, uh, districts
than in, uh, the shorter ones. In smaller electoral
districts, the main political parties, the biggest parties are,
they get this seat bonus, I would say, because
they, they, they, they end up winning more seats
than their share of the vote. WOULD, would suggest.
So we do have this, that it is one
of the things that actually explain why uh we,
why smaller parties face so many difficulties in getting
elected in this uh smaller magnitude uh districts. So
in terms of representation, you know, the history, Portugal
has this traditionally had and historically had these 5
political parties that are elected through this uh proportional
representation system, but the last decades have demonstrated that
things can change. Um, AND that the, the, the
Portugal, the Portuguese party system is also dynamic and
has been able to, you know, um, uh, so,
to see the emergence of the left block and
then more recently, the liberal initiative or the radical
populist Party figure that that has been able to
gain ground even in these uh smaller um electoral
district. I mean, uh, it's a, it's a dynamic,
uh, game. Things are, are constantly changing, but one
of the things that is more relevant and, and
I guess that Carlos demonstrates that is how resilient
the party system has, uh, despite this, the, the
newness and also to some extent the attractiveness of
these new political parties. Um, CITIZENS tend to be
drawn towards new parties. The most interesting thing is
that we were able to still keep the two
main political parties as the main players in these
games, but I mean, who knows how, how things
can evolve from now.
Right. Uh, WHAT has characterized the Portuguese economy for
the past two decades? I mean, the first two
decades of the 21st century. What would you say
are the domains where it has fared well and
in which domains, is it still lagging behind other
European nations?
Well, the economy chapter was, uh, was written by
Susan Peralta. She's one of the most well-known economists
in Portugal, and she does an amazing job in
this chapter where she demonstrates that over the past
two decades, Portugal has made huge progress in reducing
poverty and inequality. So what she demonstrates is that
we do have noticeable Improvements in these um areas.
She demonstrated poverty rates dropped, inequality was reduced, uh,
she demonstrates it uh tracing it back to the
importance of, of income transfers. So the policies that
were specifically targeted at distributing health and improving the
quality of life of citizens. What she also demonstrates
was the capacity of Portugal to bounce back from
the economic crisis. So we, that we also um
managed um then we also covered a couple of
minutes ago. Uh, SHE also demonstrates the relevance of,
of taking stock of the European Union again and
the importance of the recovery and resilience, uh, plan,
that the funding from the European Union that, that
has emerged as a golden opportunity to invest in
critical areas. As a green energy, digital transformation, social
resilience. So these are um arenas that are falling
behind. So if I was not up to now
talking about the things that are positive, one of
the things that uh Susanna demonstrates is there are
areas where Portugal is lagging behind. One of them
is obviously the levels of public investment. I mean,
one of the things that she demonstrates. Was that
public investment as a share of GDP is, is,
is just 1%. So it's really, really low and
it has been this low since 2016. So what
this means in practice is that things like transport,
health, and the education system, it hasn't, uh, these
are arenas where they need a lot of investment
and these investments have not been made. So, uh,
and we've talked about it when we mentioned the
welfare state. Another thing that she mentions is that
while all while all the other countries are dealing
with this digital green transformations, while we are lagging
behind. One of the things that she demonstrates is
that uh some of the countries are actually pouring
money into the renewable energy, sustainable transportation, and in
Portugal, we are, the investment is really, really low
in those arenas. So one of the things that
uh she concludes is that, well, uh, one, well,
we made huge progress in some arenas that are
areas that we still need to improve and obviously,
and, you know, uh, well, uh well in 2000,
while at the beginning of the 21st century, Portugal's
per capita was higher than some of the countries
in Europe like Slovakia, Estonia, and Slovenia, she talks
about it. Um, ALMOST 20 years after that, those
countries have caught up or even uh surpassed Portugal.
And one of the things that she mentions in
the book is that, well, one of the reasons
that explains this, uh, the fact that we were
surpassed by these countries was that we have problems
in terms of productivity of, we do not invest
enough in science and innovation. Uh, THAT'S also what
um Joan Assad also demonstrates and obviously she also
mentions that there's a lot of infrastructure that needs
to be um developed, so there are, we have,
uh, we are lagging behind in these arenas and
those are the ones that are putting us behind
some of the countries across Europe.
So let's now talk a little bit more about
uh attitudes that people have toward particular subjects. How
would you characterize social attitudes toward women, immigrants, and
minorities in Portugal and particularly immigrants and minorities have
been Uh, at least it seems a very polarizing
topic socially in Portugal in recent times. So how
would you characterize these kinds of social attitudes?
Well, this, this is a chapter that Elise Ramos
wrote. It's an amazing chapter because it, it, it
allows us to really map citizens' attitudes and how
these citizens' attitudes have evolved. And not only citizens'
attitudes, but regarding these aspects that you mentioned, women,
immigrants, etc. BUT what she demonstrates is how, uh
how we do have a lot of inequalities in
place at this moment. Uh, LET'S start with women,
obviously, one of the things that, uh, she concludes
is it's that, well, we do, we also, we
are still facing the wage disparities. We did, Portugal
made huge advancements in terms of women representation in
parliament, women representation in party lists. We made huge
progress here, but women still earn less than male.
Uh, THAN, than their male counterparts. So there's even
Uh, as we deal with, uh, higher qualification, uh,
profession in, in the arenas where these higher qualifications
are required, we do find that women, and what's
the least uh demonstrates is that women tend to
win 25% less than men. So the in terms
of salaries, that's, that's huge, that demonstrates a lot
about what the, how much we still need to
um Uh, work in terms of, of gender balance
and in terms of equality here. And then there's
the issue of immigrants and the narrative here is
quite complex here. Because as you mentioned, this is
one of the things that has fueled populist discourses
and so uh uh what she demonstrates is that
perceptions have shifted. For example, with the majority of
population in 2002 thought that um uh that uh
Uh, I mean, the, the majority of citizens, uh,
in, in Portugal still think that immigrants are a
threat to the labor market. So this is something
that she, uh, demonstrates. What there has been a
growing acceptance, so the number of citizens. That believe
in this has declined, but there, there is a
high level of skepticism when you find that 40%
of respondents still, still think that they are a
threat to the labor market that that is uh
that is a lot in terms of skepticism. Uh,
SO, so, so there are still citizens that think
that immigrants benefit from social services more than they
contribute, even though we have so many studies that
demonstrate. That how immigrants actually contribute to social security,
etc. BUT the perception is that these immigrants, um
there is this negative attitudes to attitudes towards immigrants
because of the use of these social services. And
also at least deals with how we also think
about minorities, racial, ethnic groups, and the situation here,
why we made some progress as well is concerning
because one of the things that she demonstrates is
that a lot of citizens in Portugal think that
some races are less intelligent. Some, some Porche think
that some races are born to be more hardworking
than others. So what she demonstrates is there are
a lot of stereotypes that are still in place
and that to some extent, if you, um, if
these stereotypes to some extent legitimize the, the discrimination
against these groups. So we did a huge progress
in terms of Becoming an inclusive society and this
links back to the welfare state and the relevance
of public investment, but we need, but there's also
a lot of work that we need, still need
to do in terms of changing the mentalities and
attitudes that citizens have towards women, immigrants and minorities,
obviously.
So, let me ask you now, what is the
current state of science and academia in Portugal? Has
Portugal been performing well in those domains?
Well, that's, this is, this is one of the
issues that I was most curious about when we
asked, uh, when we asked him and when Nuno
asked Joannaa to write this chapter about science in
Portugal. Obviously, me coming from academia, I, when I
read the chapter, I recognized a lot of patterns
that Joanna mentioned in the chapter. Well, what she,
what she demonstrates is that this, we have this
unbalance, I guess, because we have citizens that are
engaged with science. And you saw that probably with
the COVID-19, how citizens actually thought that we actually
need, need investment in science and how relevant this
can be for society. So we do have citizens
now more interested in medical science, so we do
have this, uh, citizens are interested in science museums,
we have this, we made this way. But then
what she demonstrates is, is that things are not
just about public interest. What, what she says is
that we have uh a group of citizens that
of scientific workforce that is highly trained. That is
capable of competing in the international stage. We are
now entering the stage where we compete for funds
in the European Union. We are able to position
Portugal globally, but we are still, we face some
challenges. One of them is one of the things
that she mentions is the idea that we do
not have, we still need to have a lot
more transparency in the system. The fact that we
need uh institutions, public institutions to Uh, shared data
so that only with um data that is shared
and transparent, we can ensure high public uh information
and obviously uh deal with uh science. And then,
and this, this is something that resonates these days
is the issue of political instability. What she demonstrates
is that Uh, uh, science is one of the
issues that is mostly affected by this political, uh,
instability because we have investment in scientific arenas that
has been inconsistent political changes when the party changes
in government are leading to instability and that does
not allow. Higher education institutions and research centers to
prepare for long term planning. So that's, that's a
huge, huge problem uh in the Portuguese case and
another arena that we face is in terms of
scientific publication. I mean, what. Demonstrates is that well
we have this uh capabilities we have this capacity
in terms of our universities to publish, publish in
international publications. We made a huge progress in this
also huge progress in terms of, of PhD students
that are. Uh, FORMED, but we, it's, it's as
if we reached the threshold. We, we still, while
we made huge progress, we are now entering this,
um, uh, we are stabilizing but at a lower
level than other, other European countries. So we do,
they are still moving at a faster pace than
uh as we know. So, Uh, what, while she,
while Joanna demonstrates that we have a huge hope
here because, uh, we, because we have citizens believing
in science, I mean, They support science, but this
is something again that can be fragile, the support
and attitudes that citizens towards science. If you have
elites. Mining the, the, some of these efforts that
have been done. So this, the citizens support towards
science is also something that can change, so we
still have our uh uh a lot of progress
to be We made here. We still have a
skilled scientific workforce and we have higher education institutions
that are able to compete internationally globally, and that's,
that's huge from a country as small as Portugal
and with um the, the problems in terms of
public investment that we mentioned before. And then there's
this political instability that, that. If not, if the,
the impact of political instability in terms of competitiveness
in science and academia and, and being able to
program in the long term is definitely something that
will negatively impact uh the progress in terms of
science.
So among the many different kinds of indicators from
a particular country that we can evaluate, we also
have cultural indicators. So in that regard, I would
like to ask you about the arts specifically. So
when it comes to production and consumption of art
in Portugal, what does the situation look like?
Well, this is, you, we are now entering one
of these uh chapters that I feel that I,
I hope that I do a good job in
translating what these authors have written this, I must
assume that I am not an expert in all
of these matters. However, the, well, however, the chapter
is written for a wider audience and my perception
about this chapter is that again, Uh, we have,
um, uh, significant challenges in terms of production of
arts and also in terms of consumption of arts.
Well, first of all, the production of arts deals
with the, the, um, ever present issue of the
limited resources. There are the resources available for cultural
institutions, for artists are really low. Funding for the
arts is really scarce, and it, it really reduces
the capacity of this artistic movements to emerge and
to be consistently supported through time. And this is
also what, uh, what the, what, uh, Antonio Pinto
Rivera also demonstrates is that, uh, beyond the fact
that we do not have enough resources for art,
we also face this peripheral status that, uh, to
some extent limits the capacity of the Portuguese artists
to be able to be present. In this global
culture and to have access to international markets. So
we do need here, we would need additional support
for the arts, you know, art, the, the arts
and the cultural arena is one of the arenas
where Uh, we find lower investment in our every
state budget, and then there's consumption, right? So, uh,
we'll I mean, Let's not forget that most citizens
in Portugal still face economic constraints, and obviously this
limits citizens' ability to, to deal with and to
take part in these cultural offerings. Uh, SO, what,
what he demonstrates in this chapter is that, well,
how families actually invest in culture is more modest.
And um. And uh while we do have pockets
of, of cultural activities that are vibrant across the
country, we have local art exhibition, communities that celebrate
their heritages. ETC. We, he also feels that he
also demonstrates that there are certain demographics, especially the
ones that are more constrained in terms of, of
the economic uh situation, and that generates low levels
of consumption. And low participation rates. So, uh, again,
we go back to the relevance of resources and
investment in these areas to, uh, also encourage participation
in this um cultural arenas.
So something that might not be so obvious, do
cultural factors like art consumption translate into political behavior?
Well, the short answer to that question is yes.
Uh, OR let's let's think about this uh historical
backdrop, right? So when we have this revolution in
'74, we had this huge creativity and knowledge that
was contained during the dictatorship and so after 74,
we had Artists exploring the themes of colonialism, immigration,
social justice in music, in the arts. So this
was in the film, filmmaking and uh theater groups.
So what, what he demonstrates is that there is
this huge connection between these two. And then Uh,
then this, this, uh, idea that, uh, when people
engage with the arts, they are able to, uh,
reflect the realities uh or challenge, uh, their, their
perspectives. So what it, what obviously one of the
things that comes out of this chapter is that,
is, is this idea that the arts can also
be a way of political mobilization. Uh, AND, uh,
but, but again, uh, with the limited funding and
low cultural consumption rates, this can, this can limit
the potential for, for the arts to ensure this
political uh mobilization. But I mean, and even now,
you know, that we have these movements uh about
the, the colonialism, how, how we, how we behaved
and how we have um adapt towards uh these
countries and That also, that is also connected to
the artistic aspects uh and how we took stock
of this um of some of these arts of
these countries. So the arts uh are, are, and
the political issue is often within the artistic movements.
So, uh, I, I noticed that we are close
to reaching our time limit. So in the interest
of time, let me just ask you one last
question. There's this phenomenon of the Europeanization of Portugal.
How has it been looking like and in what
areas has it occurred and how?
Well, this, this is the chapter by Sandra Fernando
Jani of Alchea. What, what they so what they
did, they deal with this idea of Europeanization, what
they explained in the chapter is that We often
think that the European Union is uh is the
huge commander, right? Like Portugal has to adjust its
domestic policies to what comes from the European Union
and that's what they call Europeanization from top down,
like countries adopt what the European Union asks us
to do. And that generates some sort of uniform
and this Europeanization is, it's actually uh how countries
are adjusting equally their policies and institutions to align
to European Union standards, but one of the things
that I find most interesting. About their chapter is
the fact that they do recognize that the, the
country has gone through this process of Europeanization, but
the country has also been able to, um, has
also been able to set its pace and has
also been able to be involved and be a
key player in the European Union. And what they
demonstrate this key role is how, how, how politically
Portugal can still, I mean, they talk about Portugal,
but they could be talking about other countries, the
way that countries can still have a voice within
these institutions and they can also help shape European
Union policies and then demonstrate that. By talking about
how Portugal was the country, he was, it was
a key player when the European Union consolidated the
relationships between the European Union and Africa. This is
basically a result of how uh uh uh the
result of Portuguese diplomacy, that's, uh, that's, uh, that's
what they demonstrate. They also talk about the Lisbon
uh strategy, uh, how they, the Portugal was trying
to demonstrate an agenda focused on innovation, knowledge base,
and this idea that it is possible for a
small country also, also to set um goals in
terms of unemployment, etc. AND then Portugal has a
unique stand because it has this, this rich huge
history related to the, the seas and that's why
Portugal was so relevant in building this integrated maritime
policy, uh, and, uh, it was mostly um because
of the vision of Jose Realdora Bros when he
was the president of the European Commission. That he
was able to bridge and to bring the knowledge
and the history that Portugal had in terms of
ocean governance into the EU discussions about uh this
ocean governance. So what I think is that while
the the European Union impacts every arena of our
daily lives, now it's impossible to think about uh
the majority of things that we do currently without
the European Union. And that that was a strategy
that we, that we decided to go through and
to be part of the European Club when we
decided to democratize the country. But I think that,
that one, what I found most interesting about the
chapter is the way that Portugal is also able
to have an impact in several key areas within
the European Union and, uh, um, and so this
Europeanization has also, it also has a little bit
of a hand of uh Portugal's that is still,
it's, it's trying to still have a role, a
relevant role within these institutions.
Great. So the book is again Portugal in the
21st century. I'm leaving a link to it in
the description of the interview. And Doctor Patricia, apart
from the book, would you like to tell people
where they can find you and your work on
the internet?
Well, the book is, is freely available. You can
obviously citizens can buy the book if they wish.
The book is available through um uh flood through
the foundation and it's also available uh um uh
by uh Rutledge, the publisher that um managed to
uh to publish the book. The book is um
is open access, that's one of the things that
Uh, the foundation, uh, allowed us, it's, uh, something
unique also, uh, the fact that while, while the
book can, well you obviously can buy the book
and have the book physically, you can also have
access each of the chapters freely and, um, and
I, I, I just want to say that uh
how are you, how much I appreciate. I appreciated
having this conversation with you about the several chapters
of the book and that I hope that this
last, last project of the late Nur Montitle actually
reaches what he uh thought about the idea that
we would be able to think about Portugal and
how unique the Portuguese experience has been through uh
this uh this, through this new millennium.
OK, great. So thank you so much for taking
the time to come on the show. It's been
a real pleasure to talk with you.
Thank you. Thank you. See you next time. Thank
you.
Hi guys, thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please share it,
leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by Nights Learning and
Development done differently, check their website at Nights.com and
also please consider supporting the show on Patreon or
PayPal. I would also like to give a huge
thank you to my main patrons and PayPal supporters
Pergo Larsson, Jerry Mullerns, Frederick Sundo, Bernard Seyche Olaf,
Alex Adam Castle, Matthew Whitting Barno, Wolf, Tim Hollis,
Erika Lenny, John Connors, Philip Fors Connolly. Then the
Mari Robert Windegaruyasi Zu Mark Nes called Holbrookfield governor
Michael Stormir, Samuel Andrea, Francis Forti Agnseroro and Hal
Herzognun Macha Joan Lays and the Samuel Corriere, Heinz,
Mark Smith, Jore, Tom Hummel, Sardus Fran David Sloan
Wilson, Asila dearraujoro and Roach Diego Londono Correa. Yannick
Punteran Rosmani Charlotte blinikol Barbara Adamhn Pavlostaevskynaleb medicine, Gary
Galman Samov Zaledrianei Poltonin John Barboza, Julian Price, Edward
Hall Edin Bronner, Douglas Fry, Franca Bartolotti Gabrielon Scorteseus
Slelisky, Scott Zachary Fish Tim Duffyani Smith John Wieman.
Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Georgianneau, Luke Lovai Giorgio
Theophanous, Chris Williamson, Peter Vozin, David Williams, the Augusta,
Anton Eriksson, Charles Murray, Alex Shaw, Marie Martinez, Coralli
Chevalier, bungalow atheists, Larry D. Lee Junior, Old Eringbo.
Sterry Michael Bailey, then Sperber, Robert Grassy Zigoren, Jeff
McMahon, Jake Zu, Barnabas radix, Mark Campbell, Thomas Dovner,
Luke Neeson, Chris Stor, Kimberly Johnson, Benjamin Galbert, Jessica
Nowicki, Linda Brandon, Nicholas Carlsson, Ismael Bensleyman. George Eoriatis,
Valentin Steinman, Perkrolis, Kate van Goller, Alexander Aubert, Liam
Dunaway, BR Masoud Ali Mohammadi, Perpendicular John Nertner, Ursula
Gudinov, Gregory Hastings, David Pinsoff Sean Nelson, Mike Levin,
and Jos Net. A special thanks to my producers.
These are Webb, Jim, Frank Lucas Steffinik, Tom Venneden,
Bernard Curtis Dixon, Benedict Muller, Thomas Trumbull, Catherine and
Patrick Tobin, Gian Carlo Montenegroal Ni Cortiz and Nick
Golden, and to my executive producers Matthew Lavender, Sergio
Quadrian, Bogdan Kanivets, and Rosie. Thank you for all.